The dataset includes information on the red variant of vinho verde, a wine product from the Mino region of Portugal. The most common physicochemical tests were selected for analysis, where chemical components are assessed to ensure purity and the absence of harmful contaminants or residuals from the manufacturing process. The data collection process for the Red Wine Quality dataset took place from May 2004 to February 2007 and the samples were directly taken from CRVV, an authorized certification agency that aims to improve the quality and marketing of vinho verde.

The data was collected using a computerized system called iLab, which manages the data from the wine testing from producers to laboratory and sensory analysis. As a result, every entry in the dataset corresponds to an analytical or sensory test. During the preprocessing stage, the database was transformed to include a distinct wine sample (with all tests) per row.

The data collection method used in this dataset has implications that a data-driven strategy that assesses the chemical components can be integrated for evaluating the quality of red wine, as opposed to relying solely on sensory analysis by human tasters, which can be subjective and prone to errors.

The dataset contains 1600 observations or rows and 11 variables or columns. In each row, this represents the data of red wine samples from the north of Portugal to model red wine quality based on physicochemical tests. Each sample includes the fixed acidity, volatile acidity, citric acid, residual sugar, free sulfur dioxide, total sulfur dioxide, density, pH, sulphates, alcohol, and its output–the quality. An individual entry on the dataset has one information each in every column. Under the given dataset from kaggle, it comprises only one file which is the csv file.